the book of Proverbs the Proverbs of
Solomon the son of David king of Israel
to know wisdom and instruction to
perceive the words of understanding to
receive the instruction of wisdom
justice judgment and equity to give
prudence to the simple to the young man
knowledge and discretion a wise man will
hear an increased learning and a man of
understanding will attain wise counsel
to understand a proverb and an enigma
the words of the wise and their riddles
the fear of the Lord is the beginning of
knowledge but fools despise wisdom and
instruction my son hear the instruction
of your father and do not forsake the
law of your mother for they will be a
graceful ornament on your head and
chains about your neck
my son if sinners entice you do not
consent if they say come with us let us
lie in wait shed blood let us look
secretly for the innocent without cause
let us swallow them alive like she'll
and whole like those who go down to the
bit we shall find all kinds of precious
possessions we shall fill our houses
with spoil casting your lot among us let
us all have one purse my son do not walk
in the way with them keep your foot from
their path for their feet run to evil
and they make haste to shed blood
surely in vain the net is spread in the
sight of any bird but they lie in wait
for their own blood they look secretly
for their own lives so are the ways of
everyone who is greedy for gain it takes
away the life of its owners
wisdom calls aloud outside she raises
her voice in the open squares she cries
out in the chief concourses at the
openings of the gates in the city she
speaks her words how long you simple
ones will you love simplicity force
corners delight in their scorning and
fools hate knowledge turn at my rebuke
surely I will pour out my spirit on you
I will make my words known to you
because I have called and you refused I
stretched out my hand and no one
regarded because you disdained all my
counsel and would have none of my rebuke
I also will laugh at your calamity I
will mock when your Terror comes when
your terror comes like a storm
and your destruction comes like a
whirlwind when distress and anguish come
upon you then they will call on me but I
will not answer they will seek me
diligently but they will not find me
because they hated knowledge and did not
choose the fear of the Lord they would
have none of my counsel and despised my
every rebuke therefore they shall eat
the fruit of their own way and be filled
to the full with their own fancies for
the turning away of this simple will
slay them and the complacency of fools
will destroy them but whoever listens to
me will dwell safely and will be secure
without fear of evil
you